The importance of the impact of IT for organizations around the world, especially in light of a very slow recovery from the global financial crisis, has amplified the need to provide a better understanding of the specific geographic similarities and differences in IT managerial and technical trends. Identifying these influential factors is one thing; the paper also looks at the challenges in addressing them, taking into account both local responsiveness and global pressures. By comparing and contrasting IT trends from different geographies, this paper presents important local and international factors, including management concerns, influential technologies, budgets/spending, and organizational considerations). In addition these trends help to prepare IT leaders for the challenges that await them. The IT trends also serve as an indicator as the respective geographies address their difficult economic environments. The research is based on data from four geographic regions, namely United States, Europe, Asia, and Latin America. The same questionnaire (albeit translated for the respective respondents), based on the lead author's well-respected and long-running Society for Information Management survey, was applied across the geographies. This paper presents the major findings based on survey responses from 787 organizations (195 U.S., 360 European, 55 Asian, 41 Australia, and 136 Latin) in 2012. The top five management concerns were: (1) Business productivity & cost reduction, (2) Business & IT alignment / integration / fusion, (3) Business agility & speed to market, (4) Business process management/reengineering, and (5) IT cost reduction. The five most influential technologies were: (1) Business intelligence, (2) Cloud computing, (3) Enterprise resource planning, (4) Apps developments, and (5) Customer relationship management. Overall, the paper finds that while the economic climate is improving at different rates around the globe - albeit at a slower pace than anticipated - ITs role continues to evolve as it provides organizations with a fundamental vehicle for reducing business expenses and new opportunities for increasing revenues.
